Page Content:
09/10/2023, 19:34 Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code | Ontario Human Rights Commission
https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/students’-handouts/fact-sheet-1-ontario-human-rights-code 1/7
English Français
 searchsearch
 
  
Home  » Teaching human rights in Ontario - A guide for Ontario schools  » Students’  handouts  » Fact sheet #1: The
Ontario Human Rights Code
Teaching human rights in Ontario - A guide for Ontario schools Teaching human rights in Ontario - A guide for Ontario schools
Introduction
Teachers’  package
Across the curriculum: ideas for other activities
Appendix 1: Glossary of human rights terms
Appendix 2 – Human rights: the historical context
Appendix 3 – Human rights legislation in Canada
Appendix 4 – human rights in Ontario
Appendix 5 – Understanding discrimination in a social context – “social construction of disadvantage”
Appendix 6 – The Code and the classroom: taking the human rights temperature of your school (for students)
Students’  handouts
Students’  handouts
Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code
Case study 1: Darlene
printer-friendly versionprinter-friendly version previousprevious nextnextFact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code
The Ontario Human Rights Code  (the Code ) provides protection from discrimination in five areas of our lives. It
states that every person has a right to freedom from discrimination in the following areas, known as social areas:
Services, goods and facilities  – including schools, hospitals, shops, restaurants, sports and recreation
organizations and facilities
Housing – the place where you live or want to live, whether you rent or own the premises
Contracts  – includes both written and oral agreements
Employment  – includes job ads, application forms, job interviews, work assignments, work environment,
training, promotions, discipline, terminations, volunteer duties, etc.
Membership in vocational associations and trade unions  – such as the Ontario Secondary School
Teachers' Federation or United Steelworkers.
Prohibited grounds of discrimination Prohibited grounds of discriminationYOUR RIGHTS YOUR RIGHTSCODE GROUNDS CODE GROUNDSSOCIAL AREAS SOCIAL AREASEDUCATION & OUTREACH EDUCATION & OUTREACH OUR WORK OUR WORK 09/10/2023, 19:34 Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code | Ontario Human Rights Commission
https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/students’-handouts/fact-sheet-1-ontario-human-rights-code 2/7The Code  recognizes that discrimination occurs most often because of a person's membership in a particular
group in society . In the five social areas above, the
Code  protects people based on the following grounds:
Age – 18-65 years (employment); 16+ years (housing); 18+ years (all other areas)
Ancestry  – family descent
Citizenship  – membership in a state or nation
Colour  – associated with race
Creed – religion or faith
Disability : There are two common ways of looking at what disability is. One way is to see a disability as a
medical condition that a person has. From this perspective, disability covers a broad range and degree of
conditions, some visible and some not visible. A disability may have been present from birth, caused by an
accident, or developed over time. There are physical, cognitive, mental and learning disabilities, mental
disorders, hearing or vision disabilities, epilepsy , drug and alcohol dependencies, environmental sensitivities,
and other conditions.
A newer way of looking at disability is that it is not something a person has. A person with a medical
condition is not necessary prevented (or disabled) from fully taking part in society . If society is designed to be
accessible and include everyone, then people with medical conditions often don’t have a problem taking
part. From this point of view , disability is a problem that occurs when a person’ s environment is not designed
to suit their abilities.
Ethnic origin  – social, cultural or religious practices drawn from a common past
Family status  – a parent/child relationship
Gender expression – the external attributes , behaviour , appearance, dress, etc. by which people express
themselves and through which others perceive that person’ s gender
Gender identity –  a person’ s conscious sense of maleness and/or femaleness; this sense of self is
separate and distinct from biological sex
Marital status  – applies equally to common-law , same-sex and opposite-sex relationships; includes
widowhood, separation, divorce
Place of origin  – country or region
Race  – common descent or external features such as skin colour , hair texture, facial characteristics
Receipt of public assistance  – in housing only
Record of offences  – provincial of fences or pardoned federal of fences (in employment only)
Sex – discrimination can be sexual in nature, or because of pregnancy . This ground includes the right to
breastfeed in public areas or in the workplace
Sexual orientation  – includes lesbian, gay , bisexual, heterosexual, two-spirited, questioning, etc.
It is possible for a person to experience discrimination based on multiple grounds (for example, sexual
orientation and race). In some cases, a person may be exposed to a particular kind of discrimination or
disadvantage because of a unique combination
of identities. For example, there are assumptions and/or stereotypes associated with “young Black males” that are
not necessarily made about “older Black males” or “young Black females.”
Exceptions to the prohibited grounds Exceptions to the prohibited grounds
There are some exceptions to these prohibited grounds in the area of employment,
such as:
An organization that serves a group protected by the Code, such as religious, educational or social
institutions serving ethnic groups, people with disabilities, religious groups, etc., may choose to employ only
members of that group
An employer may choose to hire or not hire, or to promote or not promote his or her own spouse, child or
parent or the spouse, child or parent of an employee 09/10/2023, 19:34 Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code | Ontario Human Rights Commission
https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/students’-handouts/fact-sheet-1-ontario-human-rights-code 3/7An employer may discriminate based on age, sex, record of of fences or marital status if these are genuine
requirements of the job. For example, a shelter for abused women may choose to hire only women as
counsellors; a club may hire only male attendants to work in the men's locker room; or a child care facility
may refuse to hire someone convicted of child molesting on the ground that the hiring would pose a safety
risk to the children. In such instances, the employer must consider whether any accommodation can be
made to enable that person to work in the job.
Fact sheet #2: Harassment Fact sheet #2: Harassment
Protected groups have the explicit right to be free from harassment in school, housing and employment.
The Code  defines harassment as “engaging in a course of vexatious [annoying or provoking] comment or conduct
which is known or ought reasonably to be known to be unwelcome.”
The most important word in the definition is “unwelcome.” W e do not have the right to impose our words or actions
on someone if they are not wanted. It does not matter if the person has done this intentionally or unintentionally .
Some people may be shy or afraid to respond to unwelcome comments or actions. That is why the Code  includes
the words “ought reasonably to be known to be unwelcome.”
For example, everyone is expected to know that racial, ethnic or homophobic slurs or jokes are unwelcome—the
speaker should not need to be told that the comment is unwelcome. However , sometimes it is necessary to point
out that certain behaviours are causing discomfort.
“Engaging in a course of” means that a comment or action would usually have to occur more than once for it to be
considered harassment. However , an employer need only make a comment such as “People like you have no
business here” once to a racialized person or a woman, for the employee to believe that he or she will not get
equal treatment. Comments like these create a poisoned environment for members of that group as well as
others.
The principles of harassment also apply in the area of services such as schools. For instance, if students harass
others because of their race, sex, sexual orientation, disability , religion, etc., this could be grounds to file a human
rights complaint – called an application. Education is a “service” to which all are equally entitled.
Fact sheet #3: Sexual and gender-based harassment and your education Fact sheet #3: Sexual and gender-based harassment and your education
Sexual harassment is a type of discrimination that can interfere with a person’ s education, make them feel unsafe
and stop them from reaching their full potential
in life. Sexual harassment can include:
Asking for sex in exchange for something, like of fering to improve a test score
Repeatedly asking for dates, and not taking “no” for an answer
Demanding hugs
Making unnecessary physical contact, including unwanted touching
Using rude or insulting language or making comments that stereotype girls, women, boys and men
Calling people unkind names that relate to their sex
Making sex-related comments about a person’ s physical appearance or actions
Saying or doing something because you think a person does not fit sex-role stereotypes
Posting or sharing pornography , sexual pictures, cartoons, graf fiti or other sexual images (including online)
Making sexual jokes
Bragging about sexual ability
Bullying based on sex or gender
Spreading sexual rumours or gossip (including online).
Sometimes when a person experiences these things, they don’t realize it is sexual harassment, or don’t realize the
impact it is having on them. Students might back
off from school work or school activities, skip or drop classes, or drop out of school completely .
If you are being sexually harassed you might find yourself feeling:
Isolated and alone
Embarrassed or ashamed 09/10/2023, 19:34 Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code | Ontario Human Rights Commission
https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/students’-handouts/fact-sheet-1-ontario-human-rights-code 4/7Depressed, anxious and uncertain about yourself or your future
Angry
Unsafe at school or in your community .
Some people who are sexually harassed also lose their appetite, get stomach aches and find it hard to
concentrate. In some cases, students have reported using drugs or drinking to cope. In extreme cases, they might
think about or even try suicide.
All adults who are in contact with students must make sure schools are safe, secure environments for students,
and are free from sexual harassment.
Sexually harassing or bullying someone because of their sexual orientation or gender is not acceptable. It is
against the law .
Know your rights Know your rights
As a student, you have the right to an education where you are not sexually harassed. This includes primary ,
secondary and post-secondary education, and school activities such as sports, arts and cultural activities, field
trips and tutoring.
Sexual harassment, and harassment because of sexual orientation, can also occur as part of school rituals, like
initiations.
Sexual solicitation from people who are in positions of power is prohibited under the Code. Sexual advances or
comments might come from teachers or staf f:
Example: The Ontario College of Teachers withdrew a 29-year-old teacher ’s licence because he
sexually harassed a female student through email. The teacher used a false name and sent
messages to the student that included information about what she had been wearing that day , what
route she took to school, and sexual suggestions.
Or it can take the form of bullying from other students:
Example: To hurt a rival, a girl starts a rumour that another girl is sexually promiscuous and
performs sex acts on boys behind the school.
Students who are seen as not fitting into gender norms can be left open to gender-based harassment.
Example: A grade 9 male student has many female friends and is more interested in the arts than
athletics. A group of boys at his school repeatedly call him “fag,” “homo,” “queer” and other names.
What is homophobic and gender-based bullying? What is homophobic and gender-based bullying?
At all levels of school, sexual harassment can be used to bully people because of their gender , gender identity ,
sexuality or sexual orientation. It can include name-calling, jokes, and isolating a person because they do not fit
what other people want them to be. It is dif ferent from other kinds of bullying because the harassment focuses on
a person’ s sexuality , sexual characteristics, sexual reputation, or gender and sexual stereotypes.
Homophobic and gender-based bullying can af fect anyone. In many cases, targets are people who:
Say they are gay , lesbian, bisexual or transgender
Are thought by others to be gay , lesbian, bisexual or transgender
Don’t conform to male and female stereotypes
Have same-sex parents or caregivers
Have friends that are, or are thought to be, gay , lesbian, bisexual or transgender . 09/10/2023, 19:34 Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code | Ontario Human Rights Commission
https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/students’-handouts/fact-sheet-1-ontario-human-rights-code 5/7Anti-gay and homophobic comments and behaviour are discrimination, even if the target does not identify as
lesbian, gay , bisexual, transgender (LGBT). Some cases of homophobic bullying are considered hate crimes.
What you can do What you can do
If you or someone you know is being harassed, you can ask the person to stop and you can ask someone in
authority at your school to take steps to stop it from happening.
Schools, including colleges and universities, have a legal duty to act to prevent and respond to sexual harassment
—and they must make sure they of fer environments that respect human rights.
The Ontario Ministry of Education requires Ontario school boards to respond to homophobia, gender-based
violence, sexual harassment and inappropriate sexual behaviour . To read more about these policies
visit: www .edu.gov .on.ca/eng/safeschools/bullying
If the harassment continues or is not being dealt with appropriately , you can file a human rights claim.
If you feel the harassing behaviour is getting worse, or that your safety is threatened, you can contact the police.
Fact sheet #4: Poisoned environment Fact sheet #4: Poisoned environment
A poisoned environment is created by comments or conduct that ridicule or insult a person or group protected
under the Code and cause them to feel that the environment
is hostile or unwelcoming. It violates their right to equal treatment with respect to services, goods and facilities,
housing and employment. The actions or comments do not have to be directed specifically at individuals. For
example, insulting jokes, slurs or cartoons about gay and lesbian people or racial groups, or pin-up photos that
demean women, all contribute to a poisoned environment for members of those groups.
A poisoned environment can also be created even when the insults are not necessarily directed at a person. For
example, a heterosexual male may be of fended by homophobic jokes because some of his friends may be
lesbian, gay or bisexual. Or a person belonging to a racialized group may believe because of insults that he or she
will not
be treated fairly .
It must be clearly evident that such behaviour is making people feel uncomfortable in a school or work situation. A
single incident may or may not be enough to create a poisoned environment. Other factors, such as the
seriousness of the behaviour , the relative positions of the persons involved (teacher to student, employer to
employee, landlord to tenant, etc.), and/or the impact upon the individual's access (perceived or real) to equal
treatment without discrimination would need to be considered.
Under the Code,  the employer is responsible for making sure that a poisoned environment does not exist in the
workplace. In the same way , the teacher and administration, who represent authority at the school, must make
sure that a poisoned environment does not exist for students.
Fact sheet #5: Constructive discrimination Fact sheet #5: Constructive discrimination
Constructive discrimination occurs when a seemingly neutral requirement has a discriminatory ef fect (or adverse
impact) when applied to a group protected under
the Code . For example, a requirement that all employees work on Saturdays could discriminate against people
who must worship on that day as part of their religious practice. Or a height or weight requirement could in general
exclude women and
some ethnic or racialized groups from certain jobs.
In these cases, to avoid a finding of constructive discrimination, the employer or organization would need to prove
that:
The requirement is bona fide, that is, sincerely believed to be necessary , and in an objective sense,
necessary for safety , efficiency or economy
The person from a protected group cannot be accommodated without causing undue hardship to the service
or employer . That is, it would alter the essential nature of the activity or business, af fect its economic viability
or pose a substantial health or safety risk. 09/10/2023, 19:34 Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code | Ontario Human Rights Commission
https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/students’-handouts/fact-sheet-1-ontario-human-rights-code 6/7previous next
TweetNeutral requirement:  a requirement that, on the surface, appears to be unbiased.
Adverse impact:  having a harmful result. Sometimes treating everyone the same will have a
negative ef fect on some people.
Accommodation (in employment, services and housing):  to adapt, adjust or eliminate existing
requirements or conditions, to enable a person or group to carry out the essential duties of an
activity or job.
Fact sheet #6: Systemic discrimination Fact sheet #6: Systemic discrimination
Systemic discrimination is discrimination that is part of the social or administrative structures of many
organizations, whether a business, service organization or social institution, such as a school, hospital,
government of fice, law court, etc. Systemic discrimination can be found in an organization’ s policies or practices,
and it may be invisible. Even if unintended, it can deny whole groups of people their rights or exclude them from
taking part. For example:
Racism or prejudice by people in positions of authority may violate the rights of members of certain groups,
such as when an organization hires or promotes only White males.
Biases against groups may mean that they are treated dif ferently . For example, an organization hires only
women in clerical positions and only men in sales positions.
A school may discriminate against people with disabilities in a way that is systemic. For example, they may
insist that all exams must be done in writing, which could exclude some people with learning or visual
disabilities. Or a school could only deal with parents through emails, which would make it dif ficult for
newcomers who may not have Internet access and who may need assistance understanding English.
The Ontario Human Rights Code  allows special programs to relieve disadvantage or achieve equal opportunity to
counter the ef fects of systemic discrimination. Such programs include measures to remove barriers that
discriminate against groups and make sure that disadvantaged groups have the same advantages that others
take for granted.
Bias  – an inaccurate and limited way of perceiving a group. Negative bias towards members of a
group can be expressed through language, published materials and other communication practices.
Equal treatment: treatment that brings about an equality of results and that may , in some instances,
require dif ferent treatment. For example, to give all students equal treatment in entering a building, it
may be necessary to provide a ramp for a student who uses a wheelchair
Like0
About the Commission About the Commission
Business Plans Business Plans
Annual Reports Annual Reports
News Centre News Centre
Contact us Contact us
Expense Disclosure Expense Disclosure
Accessibility Accessibility 09/10/2023, 19:34 Fact sheet #1: The Ontario Human Rights Code | Ontario Human Rights Commission
https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/students’-handouts/fact-sheet-1-ontario-human-rights-code 7/7Feedback Feedback
Privacy Statement Privacy Statement
© King’s Printer for Ontario © King’s Printer for Ontario
Open Data Open Data

Metadata:
title: Fact sheet #1_ The Ontario Human Rights Code _ Ontario Human Rights Commission

--------------------------------------------------

